---
layout: post
title: Rejecting productivity
date: 2023-09-28
description: doing "nothing" and the meaning of life
tags: 
categories: 
---

I have been reading this book called *How to Do Nothing*. What I expected when I read the title was another one of those books about mindfulness. (Mindfulness: the heavily commercialized philosophy from the “wellness” industry that prescribes meditation and “being in the moment” to stave off the anxiety that prevents you from living a happy, fulfilling, and productive life.) The book was not what I expected. It is a criticism of the assumption that life should be productive.

There is more to say about this book, which I haven't finished yet, but for now I'll just share the thoughts that surfaced as I was reading it. What does it mean to be productive? Who benefits from my productivity? What would I be doing if I were not focused on being productive?

In class today, I watched the 1939 film *Hydro*. It’s a 30-minute U.S. government-sponsored infomercial explaining the benefits of dams, and hydroelectric power, to the American people. Watching that film was a surprisingly emotional experience. Most strongly I felt a deep sense of distress as I watched trees shredded into lumber and the Columbia River choked off by a wall of concrete, as the narrator cheerfully celebrated American progress. This was followed by a montage of suburban children playing on well-lit streets, delighted housewives using new electric stoves, and thousands of men finding steady work in the wake of the Great Depression. It was all thanks to the huge bonus of productivity provided by the dams. I looked around at my well-lit, air-conditioned classroom, thought about my dishwasher, and concluded that I was one of those delighted housewives, after all.

My conflicted feelings were clearly not shared by the film’s jolly narrator. But by the end, I couldn’t be angry with him, because he sounded so genuinely proud of what he (and his country) had done. In some ways he is right to be proud. The building of the dams was a major engineering feat, a success of government, and above all, a win for the American people. It was also an ecological disaster and yet another insult to the Native American people who had inhabited this land just a century before. History is like that sometimes. You may want to reject the uncomfortable story of the past, but you cannot reject it because it is also the story of the way we live now.

Underlying this film is the same assumption that drives most of our lives today: that we ought to be productive, and where possible, find ways to increase our productivity. For the white American residents of the Pacific Northwest, being productive meant laboring in the factories or in the home, with the goal of comfortably supporting a family with a few small luxuries and the promise of a similarly comfortable life for your kids. It's a reasonable goal. It is also utterly dependent on a number of things beyond any individual's control: the global economy, the circumstances of your upbringing, the whims of your employer, and whether your government decides to build you a dam. Nearly all of us today are subject to the same forces.

I am not against the belief that you should work efficiently towards your goals. I am against the expectation that your time and effort must be spent, as much as possible, on getting ahead. This expectation is forced upon us at every stage of life. As a student, you might stay up late doing test prep or spend hours every day at sports practice for the travel team. As a working professional, you grab lunch and coffee and hurry back to your desk so you can join your next call, checking your social media as you speedwalk. As a stay-at-home parent, you research summer camps for the kids while the pasta water is boiling for this week's meal prep and a podcast plays urging you to start a side hustle. Even the things that promise us a break from the pressure, like meditation videos or wellness retreats, are framed as a way to refresh your mind so you can get back in the game.

I think we should try out different goals. Maybe our goal can be to develop a skill that employers *don't* want. Like being brave enough to draw silly little animals on hundreds of sticky notes even though you are bad at drawing. Or learning the name of every tree on the walk from your house to the corner store. Or asking questions like "Why are we *really* doing this?"

It's difficult to do something you don't think the people around you would understand or applaud. The point is not to find something bizarre to do just to be contrary. The point is to find the courage to do what you feel like doing, even when people are asking, "Why would you waste your time doing that?" I think it's very good to follow your whims, especially if they are silly or a "waste of time." Doing things that don't make sense in a world where everyone is trying to be productive allows you to step outside the obligations it places on you. That seems to me like the only way to figure out what your goals really are, or what they might be if they weren't pre-defined by the expectation of productivity.

So, having thought about it for a few minutes, what are my goals? I still want essentially the same things as those people in 1939 in the Pacific Northwest: a comfortable life with a few nice things, and the same kind of life for my (hypothetical) kids. Assuming I don't expend 100% of my energy on that, there are a couple other goals I have in mind. I want to help the people around me, and maybe they can help me, and we'll all be a little better for it. Remember how our lives are utterly dependent on forces beyond any individual's control, like the economy and the corporations and the government? I am just one little ant in comparison to these giants, but maybe if I find some other ants and we work together we can build an anthill, or something. Maybe the giants will even shift in response.

No matter what my other goals might be, I cannot do them if I spend all my time maximizing my individual productivity. It won't do to maximize my productivity in some other direction either, like if I devoted my time exclusively to raising donations for a cause, without leaving room for self-exploration. We all eventually grapple with the question: "Does my life *mean* something? Do I matter?" This is an important question, and it deserves careful attention. You must take the time to figure out what matters to you. This requires you to stop "being productive" for long enough to observe yourself wandering and learn what you would do if you weren't running towards the finish line you've been given. Once you are done, I would cheer you on as you keep running. My only hope is that you will keep running with a clearer sense of why you are doing it.

